fix: Update document shepherd writeup template based on community review (#4042)
ietf-tools/datatracker: ietf/templates/doc/shepherd_writeup.txt

{# Keep in sync with https://github.com/ietf-chairs/chairs.ietf.org/blob/main/documents/qa-style-writeup-template.md #}{% if doc.stream %}{% if doc.stream.slug == 'ietf' %}# Document Shepherd Write-Up

> *This version is dated 1 June 2022.*

Author: Yes please.

### Additional Reviews

5. Do the contents of this document closely interact with technologies in other

>    IETF working groups or external organizations, and would it hence benefit

Reviewer: Prefer keeping "therefore"

>    IETF working groups or external organizations, and would it hence benefit

Author: From @richsalz:
```suggestion
   IETF working groups or external organizations, and would it therefore benefit
```

>    IETF working groups or external organizations, and would it hence benefit

Author: See my proposed edit above.

### Additional Reviews

> 5. Does this document closely relate to work in other IETF working groups or

Reviewer: This is now very different from the original

``` 
(5) Do portions of the document need review from a particular or
from broader perspective, e.g., security, operational complexity,
AAA, DNS, DHCP, XML, or internationalization? If so, describe the
review that took place.
``` 

The original is closer to "Have you consulted your YANG doctor", while the new text is not addressing foundational technologies at all but instead asks about related (presumably ongoing) work.  What kind of relation?
Addressing a related problem, but in a different way, based on different foundational technologies?

> 5. Does this document closely relate to work in other IETF working groups or

Author: I don't read the old text as being about "foundational technologies", at least not exclusively so. Anyway, how about
```suggestion
5. Does this document closely relate to technologies from other IETF working groups or
```

Reviewer: There is a difference between getting the foundational technologies right (i18n, ABNF, ...) and interacting with tech from other SDOs.

If I work on COSE, should I get a review from OASIS DSS?

I think related is not the right term here.

Author: Suggest another one, please?

Reviewer: interact?
(I'm not sure what exactly the change from the old text is trying to achieve.  This was focused on actually requiring review, not on abstract relation [or interaction].)

Also, the "what did the YANG doctor say" part is lost.

Author: The original text didn't really make sense though, because it first asked whether reviews are needed, and then asked what the results were.

   to be handed off to the responsible Area Director?

10. Several IETF Areas have assembled [lists of common issues that their

>     reviewers encounter][6]. Are any such issues still present in the document?

Reviewer 2: This implies that the shepherd needs to evaluate the document for ALL mentioned issues and report back whether they have been resolved. That is a huge burden that very few people (if any) would be qualified to take on. Suggestion:

```suggestion
    reviewers encounter][6]. Please identify the topic(s) listed that are relevant to the document, to aid selection of reviewers.
```

Author: See rewording proposal above.

>     reviewers encounter][6]. Are any such issues still present in the document?

Author: How about:
```suggestion
    reviewers encounter][6]. For which areas have such issues been identified and addressed, and
    for which areas does this still need to happen in subsequent reviews?
```

Reviewer 2: This is better, but it needs some grammar work -- e.g., 'for which... for which'.

11. What type of RFC publication is being requested on the IETF stream ([Best
    Current Practice][13], [Proposed Standard, Internet Standard][14],
    [Informational, Experimental or Historic][15])? Why is this the proper type

>     of RFC? Do all Datatracker state attributes correctly reflect this intent?

Reviewer 2: Do we really expect the shepherd to recite why it's the appropriate type of RFC? That seems like meaningless busywork.  If someone wants to challenge it, they can explain why the chosen type isn't appropriate.

Reviewer: I find the information that is under this question now quite useful, and not an undue burden.

Reviewer 2: The information is indeed useful -- it's the requirement to state a justification which is unreasonable to me. Can we have some (not necessarily inline) examples of actually useful/helpful answers to this question?

Author: You'd be surprised how frequently WG beliefs about the status of a document, the text in the document, and the datatracker state disagree.

Reviewer: Here are a few examples from recent shepherd write-ups:

```
This document aims to become a Proposed Standard. It does have characteristics
that would also indicate Informational (it is registering code points in FCFS
regions of IANA registries), but we anticipate that this mechanism will be used
and referenced in future normative documents, thus going for PS.
```

```
  The type of RFC being requested is proposed standard. 
  It is expected that future standard track documents will make make use of 
  and reference this document normatively.
  The RFC type is clearly indicated on the title page.
```

```
Internet Standard. This is the proper type of RFC, as CBOR has achieved a high
degree of technical maturity and its implementations have obtained successful
operational experience. This is indicated in the title page header.
```

Not too onerous (certain not compared to the amount of discussion we have had in the WG before IESG submission).

Reviewer 2: Again, I am absolutely unsurprised by disagreements / misalignments about this state, and an effort to assure that they're aligned is well-founded and worth pursuing. On the other hand, also requiring the shepherd to recite why it's the correct status is not -- that's what I'm objecting to. 

@cabo, of the examples you give, the first is a non sequitur (FCFS registration has nothing to do with document status), the second is irrelevant to the requirements for PS, and the third just makes an assertion that mirrors the requirements of the requested status. 

That illustrates my point nicely -- it's not clear what is expected of the shepherd, and thus they're required to either bluster their way through the confusion or copy-and-paste from somewhere else in the hope that it'll be adequate. Vague you-have-to-know-what-they-mean requirements isn't welcoming to newcomers, and doc shepherds are often new people, as it's a good way to get upcoming folks more involved.

A strict reading of 2026 (and the documents that update it) is that:

* Proposed standard 'is stable, has resolved known design choices, has received significant community review, and appears to enjoy enough community interest to be considered valuable.'
* Internet standard additionally requires 'significant implementation and successful operational experience' and 'a high degree of technical maturity'.
* Informational 'is published for the general information of the Internet community, and does not represent an Internet community consensus or recommendation'
* Experimental 'denotes a specification that is part of some research or development effort.'

If paraphrasing one of those statements (or indeed, waving hands about needing to reference things in the future) is adequate to justify the status, why ask for the justification at all, since the requested status has already been stated? 

Otherwise, if there are other requirements or guidelines for choosing a status, where are they written down?

Reviewer: Maybe it is intuitively clear to me that this is not about the shepherd inventing a justification, but about reporting, specifically about the WG consideration that has been applied to the question of intended status.
This of course could be clarified.
(The datatracker consistency part of course could be checked automatically.)

Reviewer 2: In that case it'd be much more straightforward to ask something like:

> If there is a non-obvious reason why this status was chosen, please explain why.

It'd also be good if 2026 were updated to fold in the various updates; it's a bit ridiculous to chase them all down.

Reviewer: Well, obvious is in the eye of the beholder.  With the security area publishing almost all security standards as informational, very little is obvious to me in this space.

Reviewer 2: I don't disagree -- I think we need more guidance here.

Reviewer 3: Given @cabo's examples, perhaps something like "if not obvious please explain why the current track was chosen."  I don't have the impression that "almost all" security documents are informational; I guess we hang out in different areas within security.

Author: "Obvious" isn't the right concept here. Often, it may be obvious to some subset of authors, chairs and responsible ADs, but not for example other ADs. This question is supposed to make such information explicit for the IESG review.

Reviewer 2: The (much) bigger problem is that, to the shepherd (unless they're very experienced in the IETF process) it's more than likely not obvious or even possible to know without asking the "right" people -- that's why I'm pointing this out, and why I think we need more guidance.

Reviewer 4: I'll +1 that handwaving copy/paste reassertments just seem like busywork - or non-transparent gating

> 12. Have the authors, editors and contributors confirmed that any and all

Reviewer 3: authors and editors are, presumably, named on the document.  Is there any guidance to how to identify contributors?

> 12. Have the authors, editors and contributors confirmed that any and all

Reviewer: There is an (optional) formal contributors section as per RFC 7322.
Making it look like there is a requirement to contact those contributors has a chilling effect on actually naming contributors (if I want my draft to be advanced, I'm not going to increase the number of people involved in the process steps).

> 12. Have the authors, editors and contributors confirmed that any and all

Author: See rewording proposal, which makes this a reminder for contributors (which I think is what is done in practice during WGLC).

> 12. Have the authors, editors and contributors confirmed that any and all
>     appropriate IPR disclosures required by [BCP 78][7] and [BCP 79][8] have
>     been filed? If not, explain why. If yes, summarize any discussion and

Author: Based on suggestions from @richsalz and @cabo:
```suggestion
12. Have the authors and editors confirmed that any and all
    appropriate IPR disclosures required by [BCP 78][7] and [BCP 79][8] have
    been filed; and have all contributors been reminded of this obligation?
    If not, explain why. If yes, summarize any discussion and
```

Author: See rewording proposal.

    conclusion regarding the intellectual property rights (IPR) disclosures,

>     including links to relevant emails.

Reviewer 3: When I've doc shepherding, some non-small percentage of "no IPR" replies were private. This could be taken as implying such replies should be on the list.

Reviewer: I think we need to have a position whether IPR replies need to be publicly recorded on the list first.
This text could then reflect that position.

>     including links to relevant emails.

Author: Based on suggestions from @richsalz and @cabo:
```suggestion
    including links to any relevant public email discussion.
```

> 13. Has each author, editor and contributor shown their willingness to be listed

Reviewer 3: oxford comma, again.

> 13. Has each author, editor and contributor shown their willingness to be listed

Author: From @richsalz:
```suggestion
13. Has each author, editor, and contributor shown their willingness to be listed
```

   to be handed off to the responsible Area Director?

10. Several IETF Areas have assembled [lists of common issues that their
    reviewers encounter][6]. For which areas have such issues been identified and addressed?
    For which does this still need to happen in subsequent reviews?

11. What type of RFC publication is being requested on the IETF stream ([Best
    Current Practice][13], [Proposed Standard, Internet Standard][14],
    [Informational, Experimental or Historic][15])? Why is this the proper type
    of RFC? Do all Datatracker state attributes correctly reflect this intent?

12. Have the authors and editors confirmed that any and all
    appropriate IPR disclosures required by [BCP 78][7] and [BCP 79][8] have
    been filed; and have all contributors been reminded of this obligation?
    If not, explain why. If yes, summarize any discussion and
    conclusion regarding the intellectual property rights (IPR) disclosures,

>     include links to any relevant public email discussion.

Author: ```suggestion
    and include links to any relevant public email discussion.
```

12. Have reasonable efforts been made to remind all authors of the intellectual 
    property rights (IPR) disclosure obligations described in [BCP 79][8]?
    To the best of your knowledge, have all required disclosures been filed?
    If not, explain why. If yes, summarize any relevant discussion, including
    links to publicly-available messages when applicable.

13. Has each author, editor, and contributor shown their willingness to be listed
    as such? If the total number of authors and editors on the front page is
    greater than five, please provide a justification.

14. Document any remaining I-D nits in this document. Simply running the [idnits
    tool][8] is not enough; please review the ["Content Guidelines" on
    authors.ietf.org][15]. (Also note that the current idnits tool generates
    some incorrect warnings; a rewrite is underway.)

15. Should any informative references be normative or vice-versa? See the [IESG
    Statement on Normative and Informative References][16].

16. List any normative references that are not freely available to anyone. Did
    the community have sufficient access to review any such normative
    references?

> 17. Are there any normative downward references (see [RFC 3967][9],
>     [BCP 97][10], and the [DOWNREF registry][17])? If so, list them.

Author: ```suggestion
17. Are there any normative downward references (see [RFC 3967][9] and
    [BCP 97][10]) that are not already listed in the [DOWNREF registry][17]?
    If so, list them.
```

>     [BCP 97][10], and the [DOWNREF registry][17])? If so, list them.

Reviewer 2: 💯

17. Are there any normative downward references (see [RFC 3967][10],

>     [BCP 97][11])? If so, list them.

Reviewer 2: It'd be super-helpful to have a direct link to the downref registry here.

18. Are there normative references to documents that are not ready to be
    submitted to the IESG for publication or are otherwise in an unclear state?

>     If they exist, what is the plan for their completion?

Reviewer 3: Is the sense "If they exist" missing a "do not" ?
Perhaps s/If they exist/If so/

>     If they exist, what is the plan for their completion?

Author: From @richsalz:
```suggestion
    If so, what is the plan for their completion?
```

> 17. Are there any normative downward references (see [RFC 3967][10],
>     [BCP 97][11])? If so, list them.

Author: ```suggestion
17. Are there any normative downward references (see [RFC 3967][10],
    [BCP 97][11], and the [DOWNREF registry][18])? If so, list them.
```

[10]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3967.html
[11]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp97
[12]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8126.html
[13]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2026.html#section-5
[14]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2026.html#section-4.1
[15]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2026.html#section-4.2
[16]: https://authors.ietf.org/en/content-guidelines-overview

> [17]: https://www.ietf.org/about/groups/iesg/statements/normative-informative-references/

Author: ```suggestion
[17]: https://www.ietf.org/about/groups/iesg/statements/normative-informative-references/
[18]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/downref/
```
